docs/SDLC.md, before:

# SDLC Overview

**Software Development Lifecycle for DataEngineX - stages, artifacts, and quality gates.**

> **Quick Links:** [Lifecycle Stages](#lifecycle-stages) · [Development Workflow](#development-workflow-summary) · [Quality Gates](#4-verify-ci)

---

This document defines the software development lifecycle (SDLC) for DEX, including the required stages, artifacts, and quality gates.

## Goals

- Ship deterministic builds with a single immutable image tag per change.
- Enforce quality gates (lint, test, type checks, security scan) on every PR.
- Maintain a complete audit trail for promotion across environments.

## Lifecycle Overview

```mermaid
graph LR
    Plan[1. Plan] --> Design[2. Design]
    Design --> Implement[3. Implement]
    Implement --> Verify[4. Verify CI]
    Verify --> Release[5. Release CD]
    Release --> Operate[6. Operate]
    Operate -->|Issues| Plan
    Operate -->|Incidents| Rollback[Rollback]
    Rollback --> Operate
    
    style Plan fill:#e1f5ff
    style Design fill:#e1f5ff
    style Implement fill:#fff3cd
    style Verify fill:#fff3cd
    style Release fill:#d4edda
    style Operate fill:#d4edda
    style Rollback fill:#f8d7da
```

## Lifecycle Stages

### 1) Plan

**Entry**: Feature request, bug report, or operational task.

**Activities**:
- Define scope and acceptance criteria.
- Identify impacted services, APIs, or pipelines.
- Track work in GitHub Issues and GitHub Projects (milestones, priorities, owners).

**Exit**: Clear acceptance criteria and implementation plan.

**Artifacts**: GitHub Issue, Project card, checklist of deliverables.

---

### 2) Design

**Entry**: Approved plan.

**Activities**:
- Define interfaces, data contracts, and configuration changes.
- Update architecture or runbook docs if required.

**Exit**: Design reviewed and aligned.

**Artifacts**: Updated documentation, diagrams if applicable.

---

### 3) Implement

**Entry**: Approved design.

**Activities**:
- Develop in a short-lived feature branch.
- Add or update tests.
- Update docs if behavior or interfaces change.

**Exit**: Code complete and locally validated.

**Artifacts**: Code changes, tests, documentation updates.

---

### 4) Verify (CI)

**Entry**: Pull request opened against `dev` (integration) or `main` (release).

**Required Checks**:
- Lint: `ruff check src/ tests/`
- Formatting: `black --check .`
- Types: `mypy src/`
- Tests: `pytest -v`
- Security: CodeQL and Trivy scans

**Exit**: All checks pass and at least one reviewer approves.

**Artifacts**: CI logs, security scan reports, test results.

---

### 5) Release (CD)

**Entry**:
- Dev deployment: PR merged to `dev`.
- Stage/Prod deployment: PR merged to `main`.

**Actions**:
- Build container image once and tag with commit SHA.
- Push image to registry.
- Update environment manifests via GitOps.

**Exit**: New image tag recorded in git and ArgoCD sync completes.

**Artifacts**: Image tag, git commit updating kustomization, ArgoCD sync history.

---

### 6) Operate

**Entry**: Deployment complete.

**Activities**:
- Monitor application health and logs.
- Respond to alerts and incidents.
- Apply rollback if required.

**Exit**: Service stable and verified.

**Artifacts**: Alerts, logs, incident notes, rollback commits (if any).

## Development Workflow (Summary)

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start([New Feature/Fix]) --> Issue[Create GitHub Issue]
    Issue --> Branch["Create branch: feat/xyz"]
    Branch --> Code[Implement + Tests]
    Code --> Local["Local checks: lint, test, types"]
    Local -->|Failed| Code
    Local -->|Passed| PR["Open PR → dev"]
    PR --> CI{CI Checks}
    CI -->|Failed| Fix[Fix Issues]
    Fix --> Code
    CI -->|Passed| Review{Code Review}
    Review -->|Changes Requested| Code
    Review -->|Approved| MergeDev["Merge to dev"]
    MergeDev --> DevDeploy[Auto-deploy to dev]
    DevDeploy --> DevTest{Dev Tests Pass?}
    DevTest -->|Failed| Hotfix[Hotfix or Rollback]
    Hotfix --> Code
    DevTest -->|Passed| ReleasePR["Create PR: dev → main"]
    ReleasePR --> ReleaseCI{CI Checks}
    ReleaseCI -->|Failed| Fix
    ReleaseCI -->|Passed| ReleaseReview{Code Review}
    ReleaseReview -->|Changes Requested| Code
    ReleaseReview -->|Approved| MergeMain["Merge to main"]
    MergeMain --> ProdDeploy[Auto-deploy to stage+prod]
    ProdDeploy --> Monitor[Monitor Production]
    Monitor --> End([✓ Complete])
    
    style Start fill:#e1f5ff
    style Issue fill:#e1f5ff
    style Code fill:#fff3cd
    style CI fill:#fff3cd
    style Review fill:#fff3cd
    style DevDeploy fill:#d4edda
    style ProdDeploy fill:#d4edda
    style End fill:#d4edda
    style Hotfix fill:#f8d7da
```

**Steps**:

1. Create or update a GitHub Issue and add it to the GitHub Project board.
2. Create a feature branch: `git switch -c feat/short-description`.
3. Implement changes and add tests.
4. Run local checks: `pytest`, `ruff check src/ tests/`, `black --check`, `mypy`.
5. Open a PR to `dev` and request review.
6. After validation in dev, open a release PR from `dev` → `main`.
7. Merge after all required checks pass.

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for branch naming and PR conventions.

---

## Related Documentation

**Development:**
- **[Contributing Guide](../CONTRIBUTING.md)** - Contribution workflow
- **[CI/CD Pipeline](CI_CD.md)** - Automated build and deploy

**Operations:**
- **[Deployment Runbook](DEPLOY_RUNBOOK.md)** - Release procedures
- **[Project Management](PROJECT_MANAGEMENT.md)** - Issue tracking

---

**[← Back to Documentation Hub](README.md)**

Commit message:

feat: enhance health probes and readiness checks
- Add HealthChecker with component checks (DB, cache, external API)
- Make /health a lightweight liveness check
- Keep /ready as full dependency readiness check
- Add /startup endpoint and startup probe support
- Tune K8s probes in deployment.yaml
- Update tests for new health behavior
- Document health checks in observability guide

Tests: 24 passed

docs/SDLC.md, after:

# SDLC Overview

**Software Development Lifecycle for DataEngineX - stages, artifacts, and quality gates.**

> **Quick Links:** [Lifecycle Stages](#lifecycle-stages) · [Development Workflow](#development-workflow-summary) · [Quality Gates](#4-verify-ci)

---

This document defines the software development lifecycle (SDLC) for DEX, including the required stages, artifacts, and quality gates.

## Goals

- Ship deterministic builds with a single immutable image tag per change.
- Enforce quality gates (lint, test, type checks, security scan) on every PR.
- Maintain a complete audit trail for promotion across environments.

## Lifecycle Overview

```mermaid
graph LR
    Plan[1. Plan] --> Design[2. Design]
    Design --> Implement[3. Implement]
    Implement --> Verify[4. Verify CI]
    Verify --> Release[5. Release CD]
    Release --> Operate[6. Operate]
    Operate -->|Issues| Plan
    Operate -->|Incidents| Rollback[Rollback]
    Rollback --> Operate
    
    style Plan fill:#e1f5ff
    style Design fill:#e1f5ff
    style Implement fill:#fff3cd
    style Verify fill:#fff3cd
    style Release fill:#d4edda
    style Operate fill:#d4edda
    style Rollback fill:#f8d7da
```

## Lifecycle Stages

### 1) Plan

**Entry**: Feature request, bug report, or operational task.

**Activities**:
- Define scope and acceptance criteria.
- Identify impacted services, APIs, or pipelines.
- Track work in GitHub Issues and GitHub Projects (milestones, priorities, owners).

**Exit**: Clear acceptance criteria and implementation plan.

**Artifacts**: GitHub Issue, Project card, checklist of deliverables.

---

### 2) Design

**Entry**: Approved plan.

**Activities**:
- Define interfaces, data contracts, and configuration changes.
- Update architecture or runbook docs if required.

**Exit**: Design reviewed and aligned.

**Artifacts**: Updated documentation, diagrams if applicable.

---

### 3) Implement

**Entry**: Approved design.

**Activities**:
- Develop in a short-lived feature branch.
- Add or update tests.
- Update docs if behavior or interfaces change.

**Exit**: Code complete and locally validated.

**Artifacts**: Code changes, tests, documentation updates.

---

### 4) Verify (CI)

**Entry**: Pull request opened against `dev` (integration) or `main` (release).

**Required Checks**:
- CI, security, and quality checks as defined in the CI/CD pipeline.

See [CI/CD Pipeline](CI_CD.md) for the authoritative list of checks.

**Exit**: All checks pass and at least one reviewer approves.

**Artifacts**: CI logs, security scan reports, test results.

---

### 5) Release (CD)

**Entry**:
- Dev deployment: PR merged to `dev`.
- Stage/Prod deployment: PR merged to `main`.

**Actions**:
- Build container image once and tag with commit SHA.
- Push image to registry.
- Update environment manifests via GitOps.

**Exit**: New image tag recorded in git and ArgoCD sync completes.

**Artifacts**: Image tag, git commit updating kustomization, ArgoCD sync history.

---

### 6) Operate

**Entry**: Deployment complete.

**Activities**:
- Monitor application health and logs.
- Respond to alerts and incidents.
- Apply rollback if required.

**Exit**: Service stable and verified.

**Artifacts**: Alerts, logs, incident notes, rollback commits (if any).

## Development Workflow (Summary)

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start([New Feature/Fix]) --> Issue[Create GitHub Issue]
    Issue --> Branch["Create branch: feat/xyz"]
    Branch --> Code[Implement + Tests]
    Code --> Local["Local checks: lint, test, types"]
    Local -->|Failed| Code
    Local -->|Passed| PR["Open PR → dev"]
    PR --> CI{CI Checks}
    CI -->|Failed| Fix[Fix Issues]
    Fix --> Code
    CI -->|Passed| Review{Code Review}
    Review -->|Changes Requested| Code
    Review -->|Approved| MergeDev["Merge to dev"]
    MergeDev --> DevDeploy[Auto-deploy to dev]
    DevDeploy --> DevTest{Dev Tests Pass?}
    DevTest -->|Failed| Hotfix[Hotfix or Rollback]
    Hotfix --> Code
    DevTest -->|Passed| ReleasePR["Create PR: dev → main"]
    ReleasePR --> ReleaseCI{CI Checks}
    ReleaseCI -->|Failed| Fix
    ReleaseCI -->|Passed| ReleaseReview{Code Review}
    ReleaseReview -->|Changes Requested| Code
    ReleaseReview -->|Approved| MergeMain["Merge to main"]
    MergeMain --> ProdDeploy[Auto-deploy to stage+prod]
    ProdDeploy --> Monitor[Monitor Production]
    Monitor --> End([✓ Complete])
    
    style Start fill:#e1f5ff
    style Issue fill:#e1f5ff
    style Code fill:#fff3cd
    style CI fill:#fff3cd
    style Review fill:#fff3cd
    style DevDeploy fill:#d4edda
    style ProdDeploy fill:#d4edda
    style End fill:#d4edda
    style Hotfix fill:#f8d7da
```

**Steps**:

1. Create or update a GitHub Issue and add it to the GitHub Project board.
2. Create a feature branch and implement changes.
3. Open a PR to `dev` and request review.
4. After validation in dev, open a release PR from `dev` → `main`.
5. Merge after all required checks pass.

See [Contributing Guide](../CONTRIBUTING.md) for branch naming, local checks, and PR conventions.

---

## Related Documentation

**Development:**
- **[Contributing Guide](../CONTRIBUTING.md)** - Contribution workflow
- **[CI/CD Pipeline](CI_CD.md)** - Automated build and deploy

**Operations:**
- **[Deployment Runbook](DEPLOY_RUNBOOK.md)** - Release procedures
- **[Project Management](PROJECT_MANAGEMENT.md)** - Issue tracking

---

**[← Back to Documentation Hub](README.md)**
